---
stand_alone: true
ipr: trust200902
docname: draft-koster-t2trg-terms-00
cat: exp
pi:
  strict: 'yes'
  toc: 'yes'
  tocdepth: '3'
  symrefs: 'yes'
  sortrefs: 'yes'
  compact: 'yes'
  comments: yes
  subcompact: 'no'
  iprnotified: 'no'
title: Common Terms for Property Types used in Hypermedia Controls
area: Internet
wg: Thing-to-Thing Research Group
kw: T2TRG, Web of Things, Hypermedia, Semantic Interoperability
date: 2016-2-21
author:
- ins: M. Koster
  name: Michael Koster
  org: SmartThings
  street: 1281 Lawrence Station Road
  city: Sunnyvale
  code: '94089'
  country: USA
  phone: "+1-707-502-5136"
  email: michael.koster@smartthings.com
normative:
informative:
  RFC6690:
  I-D.ietf-core-links-json:
  RFC3986:
  RFC5988:
  RFC7252:
  I-D.ietf-core-interfaces:
  I-D.ietf-core-resource-directory:
  I-D.jennings-core-senml:

  REST:
    target: http://www.ics.uci.edu/~fielding/pubs/dissertation/fielding_dissertation.pdf
    title: Architectural Styles and the Design of Network-based Software Architectures
    author:
        ins: R. Fielding
        name: Roy Thomas Fielding
        org: University of California, Irvine
    date: 2000
    seriesinfo:
      "Ph.D.": "Dissertation, University of California, Irvine"
    format:
      PDF: http://www.ics.uci.edu/~fielding/pubs/dissertation/fielding_dissertation.pdf

  HypermediaDemonstrator: 
    target: https://github.com/connectIOT/HypermediaDemo
    title: Demonstration of a HATEOAS based system architecture for the Web of Things
    author: 
        ins: M. Koster
    date: 2016

  W3C-WoT: 
    target: https://www.w3.org/WoT/IG/
    title: W3C Web of Things Interest Group
    author: 
        ins: WoT IG
    date: 2016
    
    
  T2TRG:
    target: https://datatracker.ietf.org/rg/t2trg/charter/
    title: IRTF Thing to Thing Research Group
    author: 
        ins: IRTF
    date: 2016

    
--- abstract
Machine hypermedia content formats exist for web links {{RFC5988}} {{RFC6690}} and for data items {{I-D.jennings-core-senml}}. Resource Directories {{I-D.ietf-core-resource-directory}} may hold links of different content-formats and media types, and should be able to provide a level of semantic interoperability.

This document describes a set of terms to be used as keywords in web links and other hypermedia controls to provide semantic interoperability across constrained environments and machine to machine communication systems, and to help bridge these systems to web scale services and applications.
--- middle

# Introduction {#introduction}
There are many vocabularies proposed for indicating functions and affordances of hypermedia controls.

Hydra, HAL, RESTdesc, RAML, Siren, JSON Hyper-Schema 

Include table as example

Also
RFC 5988, RFC6690, Resource Directory, also JSON-LD


# Content Formats {#content-formats}

Link-Format, serializations, and extensions
RFC 6690, RFC 5988


#  Types of Hypermedia Controls

## Links
Hyperlinks are hyprmedia controls that provide a typed reference from a context resource to a target resource. The relation type, "rel" describes the how the target resource is related to the context. The context of a reference is determined as provided for in {RFC3986}. 

For example, with a collection, the context is by default the resource of the collection, and links associated with the collection assume this default context. Some of these links identify items in the collection and describe how items in the collection are related to the collection, for example by using the relation value rel=item. Other links may identify other resources that describe the collection or are otherwise related to the collection, for example rel=describedby indicates that the target resource contains a description of the context. 

The default context of a link may be overridden by using the "anchor" property in the link. This enables a link to be stored in a different context from the resource it describes or links to. For example, a search index may contain links unrelated to the resource the index links are stored in. These links should hane an anchor property included that defines the resource they describe. The context of a link may also be defined by including a complete reference to a URL in the target.

Link Attributes are additional properties that describe the target resource of a link. For example, content-format is indicated by "ct", as in ct=40 to indicate the CoAP header mapping for application/link-format.

## Forms
Forms are hypermedia controls that describe how to construct a message to effect a state change on the context resource. The relation type "rel" in a form describes the expected state change. The message is described in terms of the target resource, method, content format, and template. 


## Link Bindings
Link Bindings {I-D.ietf-core-interfaces} are hypermedia controls that describe how to construct a message that contains a representation of a state change that has occured on the context resource. The target of a Link Binding represents the destination resource of the message. 

The link binding may optionally contain properties that describe the expected message generation behavior, including method, media type, and template. Filter parameters may be included which define when messages should be generated.

As some examples, the state change message may be used to synchronize the state of another resource using PUT, to add state change records to a collection using POST, or to pass state change information to application handlers through a message broker using PUBLISH. 

# Identifiers {#identifiers}

This section defines a common set of identifiers for use in defining property types used in hypermedia controls, including links, forms, and link bindings. 

## Link Keywords {#link-keywords}
The following keywords indicate elements of a web link or form

"href"
:    target of a link reference. This may be a relative reference in the collection e.g. "currentValue" or a local absolute reference "/sensors/temp/currentValue" or a full reference "https://example.com/sensors/temp/currentValue"

"anchor"
:    reference to override the default context resource for the link

"rel"
:    link relation type, how the target is related to the context or how the target behaves in relation to the context in response to a specified method
{: vspace='0'}

### Link Relation Types
The following keywords are some link relations, values for the rel property, e.g. <>;rel=self

"self"
:    target resource represents the context, link describes the context, target resource may be blank

"item"
:    the target resource is an item in the context collection

"hosts"
:    indicates that the context is a host of the target resource

"about"
:    indicates that the target resource is a subject of the context

"describedby"
:    indicates that the target resource describes the context resource
{: vspace='0'}

### Link Attribute Types {#link-attributes}
The following keywords are link attributes that may have values providing additional description of the target resource, e.g. u=Cel

"rt"
:    the resource type or relation type when used with some hypermedia controls

"if"
:    the interface type, defining a view of or interaction model on the resource

"u"
:    units of measure to expected for the application semantics of the resource

"ins"
:    the instance identifier when there are links that look alike

"mt"
:    the media type type string(s) offered for the target resource

"ct"
:    the CoAP content-format number(s) offered for the target resource

"con"
:    overrides the registration context of a link in a resource directory

"obs"
:    indicates observability of target resource

"sz"
:    indicates the expected size of a representation of the target resource
{: vspace='0'}

## Form Keywords {#form-keywords}
The following additional keywords provide message construction and processing information for forms. Forms MAY also use the link attribute types already defined in {link-keywords} and {link-attributes}. Form relation types are used to describe abstract actions on the context resource, and are often derived from application semantics. 

"method"
:    protocol method to use when constructing a message for the target resource

"accept"
:    media type to use to serialize the request payload to be applied to the target resource

"template"
:    a template for constructed the expected representation of the resource to be sent in the message
{: vspace='0'}

### Form Relation Types {#form-relations}
The following keywords are example relations for forms that describe the semantics relative to the context

"additem"
:    the form describes how to add an item to a collection
{: vspace='0'}

## Link Binding Keywords
The following keywords are reserved for use in describing link bindings. Link bindings are like forms, except they instruct the system how to construct an outgoing message to indicate a state change on a resource. A Link Binding defines anchor, href, and rel, and may also use link and form attributes as needed.

"boundto"
:    a link relation type that indicates the target of the link is bound to the context resource in some way to exchange state information

"pmin"
:    minimum notification period as per CoRE Interfaces

"pmax"
:    maximum notification period as per CoRE Interfaces

"lt"
:    lower bound value for fixed threshold notification

"gt"
:    upper bound value for fixed threshold notification

"st"
:    change value for dynamic threshold notification
{: vspace='0'}


# Security Considerations

Link terms used to select resources, like addresses

Access control


--- back

