---
stand_alone: true
ipr: trust200902
docname: draft-koster-t2trg-secureaccess-00
cat: exp
pi:
  strict: 'yes'
  toc: 'yes'
  tocdepth: '3'
  symrefs: 'yes'
  sortrefs: 'yes'
  compact: 'yes'
  comments: yes
  subcompact: 'no'
  iprnotified: 'no'
title: Secure Access Control for Connected Objects
area: Internet
wg: Thing-to-Thing Research Group
kw: T2TRG, Web of Things, Security, Access Control
date: 2016-2-24
author:
- ins: M. Koster
  name: Michael Koster
  org: SmartThings
  street: 1281 Lawrence Station Road
  city: Sunnyvale
  code: '94089'
  country: USA
  phone: "+1-707-502-5136"
  email: michael.koster@smartthings.com
normative:
informative:
  RFC6690:
  I-D.ietf-core-links-json:
  RFC3986:
  RFC5988:
  RFC7252:
  I-D.ietf-core-interfaces:
  I-D.ietf-core-resource-directory:
  I-D.jennings-core-senml:

  REST:
    target: http://www.ics.uci.edu/~fielding/pubs/dissertation/fielding_dissertation.pdf
    title: Architectural Styles and the Design of Network-based Software Architectures
    author:
        ins: R. Fielding
        name: Roy Thomas Fielding
        org: University of California, Irvine
    date: 2000
    seriesinfo:
      "Ph.D.": "Dissertation, University of California, Irvine"
    format:
      PDF: http://www.ics.uci.edu/~fielding/pubs/dissertation/fielding_dissertation.pdf

  HypermediaDemonstrator: 
    target: https://github.com/connectIOT/HypermediaDemo
    title: Demonstration of a HATEOAS based system architecture for the Web of Things
    author: 
        ins: M. Koster
    date: 2016

  W3C-WoT: 
    target: https://www.w3.org/WoT/IG/
    title: W3C Web of Things Interest Group
    author: 
        ins: WoT IG
    date: 2016
    
    
  T2TRG:
    target: https://datatracker.ietf.org/rg/t2trg/charter/
    title: IRTF Thing to Thing Research Group
    author: 
        ins: IRTF
    date: 2016

    
--- abstract
Security is acknowledged as one of the key system attributes to deliver in order to achieve the internet of things at scale. This draft focuses on a single aspect of security, end-to-end access control for connected objects. In the context of this article, this means that the access control priveleges for a particular connected object or resource may be defined at some point of origin and enforced at some point of use or delivery, using information securely transmitted within the object representation itself. 
--- middle

# Introduction {#introduction}
Security is a broad topic, particularly in the context of the internet of connected things. There are many aspects and technologies needed to secure entire web scale systems, including secure naming and identity, trusted authorities, key distribution mechanisms, encryption technologies, and so on. 

This draft is focused on end-to-end access control for connected objects. The basic technique is to embed within the object a set of access control metadata elements which are associated with a set of security credentials. 

Each credential or group credential is associated with a license that enables a particular set of access methods on the object, subject to additional policy assertions contained in the access control metadata. These policy assertions may be for example time/rate/opcount restrictions in addition to read/write/execute permissions. For example the license may allow 24 hours of access with unlimited read and one time update of a specific set of properties.

# Access Control Use Cases and Requirements

{{fig-example-something}} is an example of something.

~~~
    "some thing"
~~~    
{: #fig-example-something title='Some Thing' align="left"}

# Access Control Metadata Formats

# Example object serializations using JSON-LD and Linked Data Signatures 

# Terminology {#terminology}
License
:    A metadata element that is associated with a security credential and which specifies a particular access policy to be applied to the bearer of the credential. 

Assertion
:    A metadata element that is used to present a security credential or other qualifying information transmitted as an update representation or as request parameters

Object Signing
:    The process of adding a cryptographic signature to a representation of a data object that can verify that the contents of the object have not been altered since the object was signed. 

Connected Object
:    A resource from the network point of view, which encapsulates a set of attribute or property values and may be self-describing e.g. SenML, Linked Data. Also may refer to a set of network connected capabilities to sense or actuate in the physical world. 
{: vspace='0'}

# Security Considerations
Servers need to use external protocols to secure other aspects of the system

# Reserved Identifiers {#reserved-identifiers}

"licenses"
:    string value
{: vspace='0'}

--- back

