---
stand_alone: true
ipr: trust200902
docname: draft-koster-t2trg-hsml-00
cat: exp
pi:
  strict: 'yes'
  toc: 'yes'
  tocdepth: '3'
  symrefs: 'yes'
  sortrefs: 'yes'
  compact: 'yes'
  comments: yes
  subcompact: 'no'
  iprnotified: 'no'
title: Media Types for Hypertext Sensor Markup
area: Internet
wg: Thing-to-Thing Research Group
kw: IoT, T2TRG, Web of Things, Hypermedia, Semantic Interoperability, HATEOAS, Web Linking, CoRE, Constrained Resources, REST, Hyperlinks
date: 2016-7-28
author:
- ins: M. Koster
  name: Michael Koster
  org: SmartThings
  street: 1281 Lawrence Station Road
  city: Sunnyvale
  code: '94089'
  country: USA
  phone: "+1-707-502-5136"
  email: michael.koster@smartthings.com
normative:
informative:
  RFC6690:
  I-D.ietf-core-links-json:
  RFC3986:
  RFC5988:
  RFC5989:
  RFC7252:
  RFC7516:
  RFC1866:
  I-D.ietf-core-interfaces:
  I-D.ietf-core-resource-directory:
  I-D.ietf-core-senml:
  I-D.ietf-cose-msg:
  I-D.groves-core-dynlink:
  I-D.selander-ace-object-security:

  REST:
    target: http://www.ics.uci.edu/~fielding/pubs/dissertation/fielding_dissertation.pdf
    title: Architectural Styles and the Design of Network-based Software Architectures
    author:
        ins: R. Fielding
        name: Roy Thomas Fielding
        org: University of California, Irvine
    date: 2000
    seriesinfo:
      "Ph.D.": "Dissertation, University of California, Irvine"
    format:
      PDF: http://www.ics.uci.edu/~fielding/pubs/dissertation/fielding_dissertation.pdf


  W3C-WoT: 
    target: https://www.w3.org/WoT/IG/
    title: W3C Web of Things Interest Group
    author: 
        ins: WoT IG
    date: 2016
    
    
  T2TRG:
    target: https://datatracker.ietf.org/rg/t2trg/charter/
    title: IRTF Thing to Thing Research Group
    author: 
        ins: IRTF
    date: 2016

    
--- abstract
The scale and scope of the worldwide web has been in part driven by the availability of HTML as a common serialization, data model, and interaction model for structured resources on the web. By contrast, the general use of appropriate hypermedia techniques for machine interfaces has been limited by the lack of a common markup format for serialization and exchange of structured machine resources and sensor/actuator data which includes or embeds standardized hypermedia controls. The IRTF Thing to Thing Research Group {{T2TRG}} has a charter to investigate the use of REST design style {{REST}}for machine interactions. The W3C Web of Things Interest Group {{W3C-WoT}} are investigating abstract hypermedia controls and interaction models for machines. Machine optimized content formats exist for web links {{RFC5988}} {{RFC6690}} and for data items {{I-D.ietf-core-senml}}. 

Structured data which contains both links and items is known as the collection type. This draft describes media types for representation of machine resources structured as collections. A common data model is described with a representation format that uses a common set of reserved keywords to expose hypermedia controls, which inform clients how to perform state transfer operations on resources. The underlying assumptions regarding transfer layer processing are specified in this document. The HSML media type described in this document is compatible both SenML and with CoRE Link-format by reusing the keyword identifiers and element structures from these documents in the base representation of the collection.

--- middle

# Scope of this document {#scope}

This is a broadly scoped document which specifies representation formats, data models, interaction models, transfer mapping, URI processing, and design pattern extensions including actions and monitors.

The features listed above and new features may be specified and extended as needed in other documents which refer to this document.

# Overview and Use Case Requirements

Use case requirements include the following.

A standardized way to expose self-describing resource representations using embedded hyperlinks and link annotations.

A standardized way of organizing and interacting with resource instances using hypermedia controls such as links and forms.

A standardized encapsulation of resources for modeling things, capabilities, groups, indices, and other common structures.


# Data Model and Interaction Model {#model}

The HSML data model consists of collections containing links and items. An instance of a collection is identified by a URI.

Links are standard web links as in {{RFC5988}} or {{RFC6690}}. Items are identified by links in collections. 

Links in a collection may point to items within the context of the collection or they may point to items external to the collection, on the same server or on other servers.

Items are data elements, either within the context the collection, or outide the context of the collection. An instance of an item is identified by a URI. 

An Item may only be in the context of one collection, but may be identified by any number of links in any number of collections. 

Items in the collection that use an HSML compatible data model, for example SenML, see {{I-D.ietf-core-senml}}, may be embedded in the collection and transferred either along with the links or separately from links.

## Informative Representation Examples

JSON formatted examples are used in this document to illustrate normative and informative concepts. Representations in other formats may be derived from the JSON representations.

## Links

Links follow the specifications in {{RFC5988}} and {{RFC6690}} with extensions to implement actions and monitors as described in this document and any referencing extension documents.

HSML Links may be stored in Resource Directories for discovery using CoRE Resource Directory {{I-D.ietf-core-resource-directory}}.

## Collections

Collections contain one or more links and extended links, and may contain data items referred to by the links. A representation of a collection may contain both links and data items, plus any extended links such as action forms. 

## Link Embedding

Link embedding enables the transfer of one or more items in a collection using a single transfer operation. This document describes two types of link embedding for items in the collection. Batch link embedding allows one or more resource instances (item) to each contribute part of an aggregate (collection) representation. Group link embedding allows a particular operation to be repeated for each member (item) of a group (collection). 

### Batch operations on multiple items in a collection

A collection of items enables operations on more than one item at a time by exposing a structured a representation of multiple resources in the collection.

Applications may select resources by using URI parameters, and transfer representations of multiple named resources using the SenML multi-item format.

### Collective operation on groups of linked resources

Resource links in the collection may specify group transfer semantics, where transfer operations are replicated on the resources indicated by links in the collection, optionally selected using URI parameters. Group responses may be aggregated using a multi-item format which identifies each item by URI.

# Abstract Transfer Model

The HSML media type assumes a transfer model capable of interacting with representations using a simple CRUD model, allowing for basic life cycle operations on resources and collections.

CREATE
:    Create an instance of a resource as specified using the payload as a constructor. Optionally return a reference to the created resource. Typically uses POST in CoAP {{RFC7252}} or HTTP, may use PUBLISH in pubsub protocols.

RETRIEVE
:    Obtain a representation of the selected resource. Typically uses GET in CoAP or HTTP, could use SUBSCRIBE with message retention in pubsub.

UPDATE
:    Replace or partially replace the representation of the selected resource. Typically uses PUT or PATCH in CoAP and HTTP, could use PUBLISH in pubsub in the frequent case that CREATE and UPDATE are not needed on the same resource.
 
DELETE
:    Remove the representation of the selected resource. Typically uses DELETE in CoAP or HTTP. There is no natural mapping to pubsub if a remove operation is not provided.

OBSERVE
:    Obtain a sequence of representations of the selected resource, indicating state updates which occur on the resource. Typically uses CoAP Observe, HTTP EventSource, MQTT SUBSCRIBE. OBSERVE is the transfer equivalent of performing a RETRIEVE on the resource immediately following each state change of the resource.
{: vspace='0'}


# Collections {#collection-description}
Collection representations in HSML include Base Elements, Link Elements, and Item Elements.

## Base elements
Base elements describe the context under which to interpret values embedded in subsequent items within the representation of a collection.

The base identifier element (bi) may contain an absolute URI or an absolute path reference from which to base relative references found in the links. It functions as a base URI embedded in content as per {{RFC3986}} Section 5.1.1

URI reference follows the definition in {{RFC3986}} Section 5.

The format of base elements are specified in {{I-D.ietf-core-senml}}. {{fig-example-base-identifier}} is an example of a base  element.

~~~
    {
      "bi": "/sensors/"
    }
~~~    
{: #fig-example-base-identifier title='Example Base URI' align="left"}

Other base items from SenML are permissible, including base time (bt) and base value(bv). If additional senml base element are present, the client MUST interpret the items in the collection in the context of the applicable base elements. For example, if there is a "bv" or base value elment, all of the returned values from items in the collection MUST be added to the base value as per {{I-D.ietf-core-senml}}.

## Link element
A link element is a hyperlink based on the structure and syntax of {{RFC6690}} and {{I-D.ietf-core-links-json}}. An example link element is shown in {{fig-link-element}}.

~~~~
    {
      "href": "temp",
      "rt": "some.sensor.temp"
    }
~~~~
{: #fig-link-element title='Example Link Element' align="left"}

## Item element
An item element in a collection is a data element that is referenced by a link in the collection. 

Items in the collection are indicated by references ("href") that serve as selection variables for matching to URI parameters and resource names ("n")in multi-resource representataions. Reference resolution should use the rules defined in {{RFC3986}}.

Items may be embedded in the collection, they may be subresources of the collection, or they may be items in other collections referenced by links in the collection. An example item element is shown in {{fig-item-element}}

~~~~
    {
      "n": "temp",
      "v": 27
    }
~~~~
{: #fig-item-element title='Example Item Element' align="left"}

### Items embedded in the collection
Items may be stored as simple sets of key-value pairs in the context of the collection. Items stored in this way may only offer item representations. Links about these items may be obtained from the collection that contains them.

~~~
   [ 
     {
       "bi": "/sensors/"
     },
     {
       "href": "temp",
       "rel": "item"
     },
     {
       "href": "humid",
       "rel": "item"
     },
     {
       "n": "temp",
       "v": 27
     },
     {
       "n": "humid",
       "v": 50
     }
   ]
~~~    
{: #fig-example-item title='Items Embedded in a Collection' align="left"}

### Items stored as collections
Alternatively, items themselves may be stored as single-item collections, pointed to by links in another collection. Items stored as collections may contain an item with a zero length name, and a self link for the item as shown in the collection representation of the item in {{fig-example-coll-item}}. Items stored in this way may be augmented by adding additional resources and link content to the collection. Items stored as collections may offer link format and collection format representations.

~~~
   base collection:
   [ 
     {
       "bi": "/sensors/"
     },
     {
       "href": "temp/"
     },
     {
       "href": "humid/"
     }   
   ]
   
   "temp" item:
   [ 
     {
       "bi": "/sensors/temp/"
     },
     {
       "rel": ["self","item"]
     },
     {
       "v": 27
     }
   ]
   
   "humid" item:
   [ 
     {
       "bi": "/sensors/humid/"
     },
     {
       "rel": ["self","item"]
     },
     {
       "v": 50
     }
   ]
~~~    
{: #fig-example-coll-item title='Items as Separate Collections' align="left"}

Items embedded in collections, and items linked and stored as separate collections, will all be returned using the item representation format as shown in {{fig-example-senml-item}}. A client interacting with the items representation of the example collection at /sensors/ would not need to understand the difference between embedded items and linked items that exposed similar content. 

~~~~
    [
      {
        "bi": "/sensors/"
      },
      {
        "n": "temp",
        "v": 27
      },
      {
        "n": "humid",
        "v": 50 
      }
    ]
~~~~
{: #fig-example-senml-item title='Example Items Representation' align="left"}

# Representation Formats {#representation-formats}

The HSML media type includes multiple content types and interface types {{I-D.ietf-core-interfaces}} to enable the client to select representations that optimize communication for the workflow. Representation formats include links and items together (collection formats), links alone (link formats), or items alone (item formats). 

Link formats are useful for discovery workflow, item formats are useful for interaction with resource state machines, and link+item formats are useful for constructing and modifying resource instances.

In addition to HSML native formats, standard CoRE Link-Format {{RFC6690}} and SenML formats {{I-D.ietf-core-senml}} may be exposed.

## Example Serialization Formats {#example-formats}
{{fig-example-hsml}} shows an example document in hsml+json format. This example contains a base element, a link element, and an item element.

~~~~
    RETRIEVE /sensors/ accept=application/hsml+json
    or
    RETRIEVE /sensors/ accept=application/hsml.collection+json
    or
    RETRIEVE /sensors/ 
      accept=application/hsml+json?if=hsml.collection
    Response Payload:
    [
      {
        "bi": "/sensors/"
      },
      {
        "anchor": "/sensors/",
        "rel": ["self", "index"]
      },
      {
        "href": "temp",
        "rt": "some.sensor.temp"
      },
      {
        "href": "humid",
        "rt": "some.sensor.humid"
      },
      {
        "n": "temp",
        "v": 27
      },
      {
        "n": "humid",
        "v": 50
      }
    ]
~~~~
{: #fig-example-hsml title='application/hsml+json Example' align="left"}

The HSML media type defines content formats and corresponding CoRE Interface Types that may select partial representations of the resource for interaction.

### Collection Formats

Collection formats as shown in {{fig-example-hsml}} expose all of the elements of a resource, including items, links, and link extensions. 

### Link Formats

Link content formats, when used in an "accept" option or "content-type" option in a transfer header, or when selected by the "if=hsml.link" URI parameter, will select the link elements in the collection for interaction as in {{fig-example-hsml-link}}.

~~~~
    RETRIEVE /sensors/ accept=application/hsml.link+json
    or
    RETRIEVE /sensors/ accept=application/hsml+json?if=hsml.link
    Response Payload:
    [
      {
        "anchor": "/sensors/",
        "rel": ["self", "index"]
      },
      {
        "href": "temp",
        "rt": "some.sensor.temp"
      },
      {
        "href": "humid",
        "rt": "some.sensor.humid"
      }
    ]
~~~~
{: #fig-example-hsml-link title='application/hsml.link+json Example' align="left"}

CoRE link-format content formats select RFC6690 compliant links, and may not return representations of extended links (rel=action, rel=monitor).

### Item Formats

Item content formats, when used in an "accept" option or "content-type" option in a transfer header, or when selected by the "if=hsml.item" URI parameter, will select the item elements in the collection for interaction as in {{fig-example-hsml-item}}.

~~~~
    RETRIEVE /sensors/ accept=application/hsml.item+json
    or
    RETRIEVE /sensors/ accept=application/hsml+json?if=hsml.item
    Response Payload:
    [
      {
        "bi": "/sensors/"
      },
      {
        "n": "temp",
        "v": 27
      },
      {
        "n": "humid",
        "v": 50
      }
    ]
~~~~
{: #fig-example-hsml-item title='application/hsml.item+json Example' align="left"}

URI Parameters for matching link attributes and relations may be used to select items when item representations are being specified using either content-format (accept) or interface parameters (if=). For example:

~~~~
    RETRIEVE /sensors/?if=hsml.item&rt=some.sensor.temp
    Response Payload:
    [
      {
        "bi": "/sensors/"
      },
      {
        "n": "temp",
        "v": 27
      }    
    ]
~~~~
{: #fig-example-hsml-item-rt title='Example link parameter selecting item' align="left"}

SenML content formats select data records and return SenML compliant resource names. "bn" may optionally be returned when  compliant resource names "n" may be resolved through simple string concatenation as per {{I-D.ietf-core-senml}}.

# URI and Parameter Processing

The HSML media type defines URI reference processing and URI Query processing but does not in general define fragment (#) references in URIs. 

If fragment references are provided in a particular transfer implementation, they should be used to select single items in collections in accordance with current practice.

## URI Path Processing

The path part of the URI reference used to indicate HSML resources may be used as a reference to a collection or to an item in a collection. Collection references should contain the trailing slash character "/" in accordance with {{RFC3986}}. Server implementations should return links to collections with the trailing "/", and should attempt to accept references to collections without the trailing "/" if such references can be used to construct unambiguous references.

References to items in a collection should not contain the trailing "/" character. Servers should return items in response to references that do not contain the trailing "/" character, and should attempt to accept references to items in collections with the trailing "/" if such references can be used to construct unambiguous references.

URI references may be routed to collections in the order in which path segments appear in the reference, from left to right reading the path string, separated by "/" characters.

URI references may alternatively be routed as opaque strings to resources. In this case, the resolution of relative references to items in a collection should be possible by concatenating the relative reference to the context URI of the collection. Note that this may enforce certain naming conventions such as the trailing slash in practice. 

## URI Parameter processing

URI Parameters, typically mapped as query parameters in HTTP and CoAP, are used for selecting resources, selecting partial representations, and otherwise modifying aspects of the expected or included representation. In this way, they may be considered part of the URI, since they help identify a unique representation to be transferred.

### Resource selection

URI Parameters may be used to select resources in a collection for transfer. This is done using the common parameter matching rules specified in {{RFC6690}}.

Resource selection is performed based on matching URI Parameters with Link Parameters of all links in the collection which are exposed by the indicated media type and interface type. URI Parameters listed in {{uri-params}} are excluded from the matching process. 

The target resource selection depends on the content-format specified in the request or the interface type specified in the URI parameters. 

The collection content-formats or interface types select all links and items in the collection, including link extensions.

The link content formats or interface types select all links in the collection. 

The item content formats or interface types select all items in the collection.

# Transfer Model Mapping to Collections

## Target Resource is Collection 

### RETRIEVE 
Return a representation of selected elements. Return a list of elements in the collection, including links and optionally representations of items, for example {{fig-example-hsml-retrieve}}. Elements may include link extenstions, for example action links and monitor links.

~~~~
    RETRIEVE /sensors/ accept=application/hsml.collection+json
    Response Payload:
    [
      {
        "bi": "/sensors/"
      },
      {
        "anchor": "/sensors/",
        "rel": ["self", "index"]
      },
      {
        "href": "temp",
        "rt": "some.sensor.temp"
      },
      {
        "href": "humid",
        "rt": "some.sensor.humid"
      },
      {
        "n": "temp",
        "v": 27
      },
      {
        "n": "humid",
        "v": 50
      }
    ]
~~~~
{: #fig-example-hsml-retrieve title='Retrieve Collection' align="left"}

### UPDATE 
UPDATE Selected Elements, replacing all selected elements with elements included in the payload. Update operations may include replace (PUT) and partial update (PATCH) oprations where supported in the transfer protocol. The server response should indicate that the resource was Changed.

~~~~
    UPDATE /sensors/?href=temp 
      content-type=application/hsml.collection+json
    Payload:
    [
      {
        "rt": ["some.sensor.temp", "some.other.type"]
      }
    ]
    Response: Changed
    
    RETRIEVE /sensors/ accept=application/hsml.collection+json
    Response Payload:
    [
      {
        "bi": "/sensors/"
      },
      {
        "anchor": "/sensors/",
        "rel": ["self", "index"]
      },
      {
        "href": "temp",
        "rt": ["some.sensor.temp", "some.other.type"]
      },
      {
        "href": "humid",
        "rt": "some.sensor.humid"
      },
      {
        "n": "temp",
        "v": 27
      },
      {
        "n": "humid",
        "v": 50
      }
    ]
~~~~
{: #fig-example-hsml-update title='Update Item in Collection' align="left"}

### CREATE 
Add Elements to Collection, including links and items, where the elements are specified by representations included in the payload. Hints and directives about the created resource may be included in the payload as link parameters, for example a value for href, specifying the location of the created resource. The server is expected to return the location of created resource instances to the client in a header or other response parameter. For example, the "Location" option in CoAP or "Location" header in HTTP should be used to identify the created resource. The server response should indicate that a resource was Created.

~~~~
    CREATE /sensors/ content-type=application/hsml.collection+json
    Payload:
    [
      {
        "href": "barometer",
        "rt": "some.sensor.mbar"
      },
      {
        "n": "barometer",
        "v": 993
      }
    ]
    Response: Created
    Location: "barometer"
    
    RETRIEVE /sensors/ accept=application/hsml.collection+json
    Response Payload:
    [
      {
        "bi": "/sensors/"
      },
      {
        "anchor": "/sensors/",
        "rel": ["self", "index"]
      },
      {
        "href": "barometer",
        "rt": "some.sensor.mbar"
      },
      {
        "href": "temp",
        "rt": ["some.sensor.temp", "some.other.type"]
      },
      {
        "href": "humid",
        "rt": "some.sensor.humid"
      },
      {
        "n": "barometer",
        "v": 993
      },
      {
        "n": "temp",
        "v": 27
      },
      {
        "n": "humid",
        "v": 50
      }
    ]
~~~~
{: #fig-example-hsml-create title='Create Item in Collection' align="left"}

### DELETE 
Remove Selected Elements from the collection. If no elements are selected, remove the collection. The server response should indicate that the resource was Deleted.

~~~~
    DELETE /sensors/?href=barometer
    Response: Deleted
    
    RETRIEVE /sensors/ accept=application/hsml.collection+json
    Response Payload:
    [
      {
        "bi": "/sensors/"
      },
      {
        "anchor": "/sensors/",
        "rel": ["self", "index"]
      },
      {
        "href": "temp",
        "rt": ["some.sensor.temp", "some.other.type"]
      },
      {
        "href": "humid",
        "rt": "some.sensor.humid"
      },
      {
        "n": "temp",
        "v": 27
      },
      {
        "n": "humid",
        "v": 50
      }
    ]
~~~~
{: #fig-example-hsml-delete title='Delete Item in Collection' align="left"}

## Target URI is Collection, Target Resource is Link

### RETRIEVE 
List Selected Links, for example {{fig-example-link-retrieve}}.

~~~~
    RETRIEVE /sensors/ accept=application/hsml.link+json
    Response Payload:
    [
      {
        "anchor": "/sensors/",
        "rel": ["self", "index"]
      },
      {
        "href": "temp",
        "rt": ["some.sensor.temp", "some.other.type"]
      },
      {
        "href": "humid",
        "rt": "some.sensor.humid"
      }
    ]
    
    RETRIEVE /sensors/?rt=some.sensor.temp 
    accept=application/hsml.link+json
    Response Payload:
    [
      {
        "href": "temp",
        "rt": ["some.sensor.temp", "some.other.type"]
      }
    ]
     
~~~~
{: #fig-example-link-retrieve title='Retrieve Links' align="left"}

### UPDATE
Modify Selected Links, replacing link elements with elements included in the payload. Update operations may include replace (PUT) and partial update (PATCH) oprations where supported in the transfer protocol. The server response should indicate that the resource was Changed.

~~~~
    UPDATE /sensors/?href=temp 
    content-type=application/hsml.link+json
    Payload:
    [
      {
        "rt": "some.sensor.temp"
      }
    ]
    
    RETRIEVE /sensors/ accept=application/hsml.link+json
    Response Payload:
    [
      {
        "anchor": "/sensors/",
        "rel": ["self", "index"]
      },
      {
        "href": "temp",
        "rt": "some.sensor.temp",
      },
      {
        "href": "humid",
        "rt": "some.sensor.humid"
      }
    ]
~~~~
{: #fig-example-link-update title='Update Links' align="left"}

### CREATE 
Add Links to the collection, where the links are included in the payload. The server response should indicate that the resource was Changed.

~~~~
    CREATE /sensors/ content-type=application/hsml.link+json
    Payload:
    [
      {
        "href": "/sensor-group/"
      }
    ]
    Response: Changed
    
    RETRIEVE /sensors/ accept=application/hsml.link+json
    Response Payload:
    [
      {
        "href": "/sensor-group/"
      },
      {
        "anchor": "/sensors/",
        "rel": ["self", "index"]
      },
      {
        "href": "temp",
        "rt": "some.sensor.temp",
      },
      {
        "href": "humid",
        "rt": "some.sensor.humid"
      }
    ]

~~~~
{: #fig-example-link-create title='Create Links' align="left"}

### DELETE
Remove Selected Links from the collection. The server response should indicate that the resource was Changed. If links point to items in the context of the collection, either remove the items as well as the links, or leave the collection as is and return a method error (Method Not Allowed).

~~~~
    DELETE /sensors/?href=sensor-group 
    Response: Changed
   
    RETRIEVE /sensors/ accept=application/hsml.link+json
    Response Payload:
    [
      {
        "anchor": "/sensors/",
        "rel": ["self", "index"]
      },
      {
        "href": "temp",
        "rt": "some.sensor.temp",
      },
      {
        "href": "humid",
        "rt": "some.sensor.humid"
      }
    ]
~~~~
{: #fig-example-link-delete title='Delete Links' align="left"}

## Target URI is Collection, Target Resource is Item

### Link Embedding Items

Collective operations on items in collections are invoked by using the URI of the collections, along with URI parameters, to select one or more items in the collection. 

Items which are compatible with the HSML item format may be returned with multiple items embedded in a single representation.

### RETRIEVE
Retrieve Selected Items, and return a composite representation of all selected items, for example {{fig-example-item-retrieve}}.

~~~~
    RETRIEVE /sensors/ accept=application/hsml.item+json
    Response Payload:
    [
      {
        "bi": "/sensors/"
      },
      {
        "n": "temp",
        "v": 27
      },
      {
        "n": "humid",
        "v": 50
      }
    ]
    
    RETRIEVE /sensors/?href=temp 
    accept=application/hsml.item+json
    Response Payload:
    [
      {
        "bi": "/sensors/"
      },
      {
        "n": "temp",
        "v": 27
      }
    ]
~~~~
{: #fig-example-item-retrieve title='Retrieve Items' align="left"}

### UPDATE
Modify Selected Items, replacing all selected items with items included in the payload which match by name "n" value. Update operations may include replace (PUT) and partial update (PATCH) oprations where supported in the transfer protocol. The server response should indicate that the resource was Changed.

~~~~
    UPDATE /sensors/ content-type=application/hsml.item+json
    Payload:
    [
      {
        "n": "temp",
        "v": 30
      }
    ]
    Response: Changed

    RETRIEVE /sensors/ accept=application/hsml.item+json
    Response Payload:
    [
      {
        "bi": "/sensors/"
      },
      {
        "n": "temp",
        "v": 30
      },
      {
        "n": "humid",
        "v": 50
      }
    ]
~~~~
{: #fig-example-item-update title='Update Items' align="left"}

### CREATE
Create Items and add them to the collection with system-constructed links. Link content is determined by the resource type or traits defined by application semantics. Server is expected to return the location of created resource instances to the client in a header or other response parameter. For example, the "Location" option in CoAP or "Location" header in HTTP should be used to identify the created resource. THe server response should indicate that a resource was Created.

~~~~
    CREATE /sensors/ content-type=application/hsml.item+json
    Payload:
    [
      {
        "n": "barometer",
        "v": 1002
      }
    ]
    Response: Created

    RETRIEVE /sensors/ accept=application/hsml.item+json
    Response Payload:
    [
      {
        "bi": "/sensors/"
      },
      {
        "n": "temp",
        "v": 30
      },
      {
        "n": "barometer",
        "v": 1002
      },
      {
        "n": "humid",
        "v": 50
      }
    ]
~~~~
{: #fig-example-item-create title='Create Items' align="left"}

### DELETE
Remove Selected Items and corresponding links from the collection. The server response should indicate that the resource was Deleted. If no items are selected, return a method error (Method Not Allowed).

~~~~
    DELETE /sensors/?href=barometer 
    Response: Deleted

    RETRIEVE /sensors/ accept=application/hsml.item+json
    Response Payload:
    [
      {
        "bi": "/sensors/"
      },
      {
        "n": "temp",
        "v": 30
      },
      {
        "n": "humid",
        "v": 50
      }
    ]
~~~~
{: #fig-example-item-delete title='Delete Items' align="left"}


## Target URI is Item 

### RETRIEVE 
Return a representation of the Item in the content type according to the accept option of the RETRIEVE request, or using a system defined content-format if there is no accept option provided.

~~~~
    RETRIEVE /sensors/temp accept=text/plain
    Response Payload:
    30    
~~~~
{: #fig-example-one-item-retrieve title='Retrieve One Item' align="left"}

### UPDATE 
Replace the resource state with the state defined in the supplied representation according to the content-type or ct option. Update operations may include replace (PUT) and partial update (PATCH) oprations where supported in the transfer protocol. The server response should indicate that the resource was Changed.

~~~~
    UPDATE /sensors/temp content-type=text/plain
    Payload:
    33    
    
    RETRIEVE /sensors/temp accept=text/plain
    Response Payload:
    33   
~~~~
{: #fig-example-one-item-update title='Update One Item' align="left"}

### CREATE 
Not Defined, application dependent.

### DELETE 
Remove the links to the item from the collection, and remove the item. If the item is stored as a collection, remove the collection. The server response should indicate that the resource was Deleted.

~~~~
    DELETE /sensors/temp 
    
    RETRIEVE /sensors/temp accept=text/plain
    Response: Not Found
~~~~
{: #fig-example-one-item-delete title='Delete One Item' align="left"}

## Groups {#groups}

Group transfer operations are provided by collections that contain links with the "grp" relation value. 

Transfer operations which specify the collection URI as target and use the item content format are sent to the resolved URI of each link in the collection that contains the "grp" relation.

URI Parameters used for resource selection and matching are sent to the target URIs of all links that contain the "grp" relation.

Responses from the selected group resources are aggregated and by default returned as a single response. The group response SHOULD be returned as an outer array where such representation is available, for example a JSON array which contains elements consisting of SenML responses.

Optionally, a chunked response may be specified, if provided by the transfer implementation, in which the response from each group member is returned individually within a sequence of responses.

The return code should be based on successful responses from link targets. An implementation of a group collection may choose to allow some rejected responses from link targets, depending on the composition of the link targets. A group may not be required to be composed of link targets that always accept all requests; this is at the discretion of the resource designer.

No mechanism is provided in this document to enable a client to inspect the separate return codes from each group link target resource. Multiple transfer headers may be supplied in some representations, or mapped to metadata in others. 

The following examples assume the prior example from {{fig-example-coll-item}} indexed by a group collection as in {{fig-example-hsml-grp}}.

~~~~
    RETRIEVE /sensor-group/ accept=application/hsml.collection+json
    Response Payload:
    [
      {
        "bi": "/sensor-group/"
      },
      {
        "anchor": "/sensor-group/",
        "rel": ["self", "index"]
      },
      {
        "href": "/sensors/temp/",
        "rel": "grp"
      },
      {
        "href": "/sensors/humid/",
        "rel": "grp"
      }
    ]
~~~~
{: #fig-example-hsml-grp title='Example Group Collection' align="left"}

### RETRIEVE
Forwards the RETRIEVE request to each link in the collection that contains the "grp" relation. Returns the response from each link target as an element in an array representation. 

~~~~
    RETRIEVE /sensor-group/ accept=application/hsml.item+json
    Response Payload:
    [
      [
        {
          "bi": "/sensors/temp/"
        },
        {
          "v": 33
        }
      ],
      [
        {
          "bi": "/sensors/humid/"
        },
        {
          "v": 41
        }
      ]
    ]
~~~~
{: #fig-example-hsml-grp-retrieve title='Example Group Retrieve' align="left"}

### UPDATE
Forward the UPDATE request to each link in the collection that contains the "grp" relation. 

~~~~
    UPDATE /sensor-group/ content-type=application/hsml.item+json
    Payload:
    [
      {
        "v": 0
      }
    ]
    Response: Changed
    
    RETRIEVE /sensor-group/ accept=application/hsml.item+json
    Response Payload:
    [
      [
        {
          "bi": "/sensors/temp/"
        },
        {
          "v": 0
        }
      ],
      [
        {
          "bi": "/sensors/humid/"
        },
        {
          "v": 0
        }
      ]
    ]
~~~~
{: #fig-example-hsml-grp-update title='Example Group Update' align="left"}

### CREATE
Forward the CREATE request to each link in the collection that contains the "grp" relation. In the example shown in {{fig-example-hsml-grp-create}}, an additional named resource is being created within each (collection type) item to hold a location value for that item.

~~~~
    CREATE /sensor-group/ content-type=application/hsml.item+json
    Payload:
    [
      {
        "n": "location",
        "vs": "living room"
      }
    ]
    Response: Created
    
    RETRIEVE /sensor-group/ accept=application/hsml.item+json
    Response Payload:
    [
      [
        {
          "bi": "/sensors/temp/"
        },
        {
          "v": 0
        },
        {
          "n": "location",
          "vs": "living room"
        }

      ],
      [
        {
          "bi": "/sensors/humid/"
        },
        {
          "v": 0
        },
        {
          "n": "location",
          "vs": "living room"
        }
      ]
    ]
~~~~
{: #fig-example-hsml-grp-create title='Example Group Create' align="left"}


### DELETE
Forward the DELETE request to each link in the collection that contains the "grp" relation. In the example shown in {{fig-example-hsml-grp-delete}}, the URI parameter ?href=location selects the resource at the relative URI reference "location" at each group link target for delete.

~~~~
    DELETE /sensor-group/?href=location 
    Response: Deleted
    
    RETRIEVE /sensor-group/ accept=application/hsml.item+json

    Response Payload:
    [
      [
        {
          "bi": "/sensors/temp/"
        },
        {
          "v": 0
        }
      ],
      [
        {
          "bi": "/sensors/humid/"
        },
        {
          "v": 0
        }
      ]
    ]

~~~~
{: #fig-example-hsml-grp-delete title='Example Group Delete' align="left"}

# Link extensions

## Actions

Actions are hypermedia controls, indicated by a rel=action value in a link, used to construct transfer operations that change the state of resources. The use roughly follows the use of forms in HTML {{RFC1866}}, with semantics more consistent with links. See {{action-params}} for more information.

An example Action element is shown in {{fig-action-element}}.

~~~~
    {
      "rel": "action",
      "type": "st.on",
      "href": "commands",
      "method": "create",
      "accept": "application/json",
      "schema": {"value": "on"}
    }
~~~~
{: #fig-action-element title='Example Action Element' align="left"}

This Action element informs the client that to perform a type "st.on" action on the context resource, perform a CREATE method on the "commands" URI relative to the context URI, using the application/json content type, with a payload as defined by the "Schema" parameter.

## Monitors

Monitors are hypermedia controls, indicated by a rel=monitor value in a link, used to construct transfer operations that expose state changes of resources. A monitor invokes an outbound transfer operation on a target resource. Monitors use the IANA registered link relation "monitor", defined in {{RFC5989}}.

Monitors have a set of accept parameters that indicate how the context resource is being observed, a set of filter parameters that indicate the conditions for generating a state change in the monitor, and a set of target parameters that indicate how state changes are to be applied to the monitor resource. See {{monitor-params}} for more information.

An example Monitor element is shown in {{fig-monitor-element}}.

~~~~
    {
      "rel": "monitor",
      "href": "tank-level-events",
      "content-type": "application/senml+json",
      "target-method": "create",
      "pmin": 600,
      "pmax": 3600,
      "nbul": 20,
      "nbll": 80
    }
~~~~
{: #fig-monitor-element title='Example Monitor Element' align="left"}

This Monitor element defines a monitor resource at the "tank-level-events" URI relative to the context URI, which OBSERVEs the context URI, and updates the "tank-level-events" resource using the CREATE method to add JSON items to the collection, according to the given conditional parameters no more frequently than once every 600 seconds, at least once every 3600 seconds, when the reading is in the notification band, which has a lower limit of 80 and wraps around zero to an upper limit of 20. This has the effect of defining a low level alert notification and high level alert notification.

# Reserved Identifiers {#reserved-identifiers}

This section defines the common reserved identifiers that are expected to be processed by implementations of HSML clients and servers. There are many more relation types and link parameters defined and registered with IANA. Implementations should not restrict processing to the keywords identified in this document; they should accept all IANA registered keywords as valid identifiers.

Many of the keywords listed are defined in other RFCs and IETF documents. This document does not redefine any existing keywords. Where a definition exists, the existing definition will be used. Where multiple conflicting definitions exist, this document will indicate the required definition.

New definitions are summarized in {{iana-cons}}.

## Default CURIE

Identifiers in representations using the HSML media types are assumed to use the default CURIE "hsml". An identifier that is not matched to an existing namespace is assumed to carry the prefix "hsml".

For example, if the identifier "method" is encountered and it doesn't resolve to an IANA registered parameter (reg-parameter in {{RFC5988}}) resolution should be attempted using "hsml:method".

The default CURIE "hsml" identifies a namespace defined by the identifiers in {{reserved-identifiers}} of this document.

## URI Processing Parameters {#uri-params}

The following URI Parameters are used to filter representations according to specific processing rules and should not be used to attempt to match link parameters.

"if"
:    Interface type, used to select a partial representation of a collection

"count"
:    Indicates the number of items to be returned from the collection

"start"
:    Indicates the array index of the item in the collection to select as the first item to be returned

"page"
:    Page number, in units of count

## Link Keywords {#link-keywords}
The following keywords are reserved for use in an HSML serialization to indicate elements of a web link

"anchor"
:    Overrides the default resource context of the link

"rel"
:    Link relation type as defined in {{RFC5988}} and {{RFC6690}}

"href"
:    Target of a link reference. This may be a relative reference in the collection e.g. "currentValue" or a local absolute reference "/sensors/temp/currentValue" or a full reference "https://example.com/sensors/temp/currentValue"
{: vspace='0'}

### Link Relation Types
The following keywords are reserved for use in a HSML serialization to indicate types of link relations, and are used for values of "rel". 

"self"
:    Refers to the collection that contains the link

"item"
:    The link points to an item in the collection

"grp"
:    The item the link points to is available for collective interaction through the collection URI according to group semantics described in {{groups}}.
{: vspace='0'}

### Link Attribute Types 
The following keywords are reserved for use in a HSML serialization to indicate types of link attributes

"rt"
:    The resource type(s) of the item

"u"
:    Units of measure

"ct"
:    The CoAP content-format number(s) associated with the item

"content-type"
:    The media type string(s) associated with the item

"obs"
:    Presence of this attribute indicates that the associated resource is observable
{: vspace='0'}

## Item Keywords {#item-keywords}
The following keywords are reserved for use in a HSML serialization to indicate elements within the serialization. Some of these are defined in {{I-D.ietf-core-senml}}.

"bi"
:    The base URI of the collection, relative to the service location e.g. "/sensors/temp/" Thi sis a new definition for HSML

"bt"
:    The base time that corresponds to the encapsulated state of the collection

"t"
:    The time stamp that corresponds to the encapsulated state of the item in the collection, relative to the base time "bt"

"n"
:    The name or URI of the resource, relative to the base name or base URI 

"u"
:    Units of measure

"v"
:    Number value

"vb"
:    Boolean value

"vs"
:    String value
{: vspace='0'}

## Link Parameters used in Actions {#action-params}

"anchor"
:    May override the default context of an action and store it in a different location from the subject resource

"rel"
:    Indicates that this control is an action when rel contains the value "action"

"href"
:    URI for mapping or invoking the action specified in the action control.

"type"
:    Additional indicator of the action being exposed, can be used with "rel"

"method"
:    Transfer method to use on a particular action

"accept"
:    The Content-Types or CoAP content-formats that are accepted on create and update methods

"content-type"
:    The media type string(s) that are exposed by retrieve and observe methods

"ct"
:    The CoAP content-format number(s) exposed 

"schema"
:    Indicates the schema to use for constructing or interpreting transfer payloads, may be a literal value or a URI pointing to an instance of a schema
{: vspace='0'}

## Link Parameters used in Monitors {#monitor-params}

"anchor"
:    May override the context URI of a monitor with any observable resource

"rel"
:    Indicates that this control is a monitor when rel contains the value "monitor"

"href"
:    The URI of the resource used to monitor context URI, where transfer operations will be sent.

"accept"
:    The media type string or CoAP content-format to request from the observed resource

"content-type"
:    The media type string to use in the transfer operation

"ct"
:    the CoAP content-format number to use in the transfer operation

"accept-method"
:    Transfer method to use in request from the observed resource, default is OBSERVE

"target-method"
:    Transfer method to use for notifications, default is UPDATE

"accept-schema"
:    Schema to use in interpreting the observed resource payload, required if target-schema is used.

"target-schema"
:    Schema to use in constructing the notification transfer payload, default is to transfer the accepted payload unmodified to the target resource.
{: vspace='0'}

## Conditional Observe Parameters used in Monitors

"pmin"
:    Minimum time between notifications from a monitor

"pmax"
:    Maximum time between notifications from a monitor

"gt"
:    Value to match or exceed to determine notification condition

"lt"
:    Value to match or be less than to determine notification condition

"st"
:    Value change +/- from last report to determine notification condition

"eq"
:    Value to match, or change from, to determine notification condition

"nbll"
:    Defines a lower limit, at or above which notification is enabled

"nbul"
:    Defines an upper limit, at or below which notification is enabled

"init"
:    Starts the notification state machine with an initial value
{: vspace='0'}

## Link Attribute Values 
The following keywords are reserved for use in a HSML serialization to indicate values of link attributes

"create"
:    Transfer layer CREATE operation, value of "method" or "target-method"

"retrieve"
:    Transfer layer RETRIEVE operation, value of "method" or "accept-method"

"update"
:    Transfer layer UPDATE operation, value of "method" or "target-method"

"delete"
:    Transfer layer DELETE operation, value of "method" or "target-method"

"observe"
:    Transfer layer OBSERVE operation, value of "method" or "accept-method"
{: vspace='0'}


# IANA Considerations {#iana-cons}

## New Media Types 

Type

* application

Subtypes 

* hsml
* hsml.collection
* hsml.link
* hsml.item

Media type strings

* application/hsml 
* application/hsml.collection
* application/hsml.link
* application/hsml.item

* application/hsml+json
* application/hsml.collection+json
* application/hsml.link+json
* application/hsml.item+json

## New CoRE Parameters Content Formats

(subject to Structured Syntax encoding rules TBD)

* 22000 - application/hsml+json 
* 22001 - application/hsml.link+json
* 22002 - application/hsml.item+json

## New Link Parameters

* method
* schema
* content-type
* ct

* accept-method
* target-method
* accept-schema
* target-schema

The following should be registered in the CoRE dynamic linking draft {{I-D.groves-core-dynlink}}.

* pmin
* pmax
* nbll
* nbul
* init
* lt
* gt
* st
* eq


## New Link Relation Types

* grp

## New CoRE Interface Types

* hsml.collection
* hsml.item
* hsml.link

## Transfer Layer Methods 
These definitions may use the default CURIE and do not need to be registered with IANA

* hsml:create
* hsml:retrieve
* hsml:update
* hsml:delete
* hsml:observe

# Security Considerations

## Object Signing
Collection representations are resource state encapsulations and may be transmitted and stored as signed objects in order to protect the integrity of data and metadata, including time and embedded access control information.

## Signed Embedded Time Stamps
The collection may include time stamps (bt and t) that are signed with the object data and metadata.

## Signed Embedded Access Control 
The collection representation may include embedded access control information, also signed with the metadata, that can instruct the server to enforce a particular access policy for transfer requests.

## Secure State Updates
Representations submitted to a server to update the state of a resource (UPDATE, CREATE, DELETE) may also contain embedded signed assertions which may be used by the server to decide whether to apply or reject the update.

## Object Signing and Encryption
Object signing and encryption SHOULD use the mechanisms specified in IETF documents for secure JSON Objects {{RFC7516}} and CBOR Objects {{I-D.ietf-cose-msg}} {{I-D.selander-ace-object-security}}.


--- back

